[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Spiritual actually
means to breathe.
It comes from the Latin
root spirare, breath, life.
Actually, you could
say breath word
comes from these ancient
spiritual practices.
And really Pranayama is like a
pharmacy of different breathing
techniques, where science
is now catching up
with what the ancients
knew thousands of years
ago and showing how many
incredible health benefits there
are from these whole variety
of different techniques.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There is one action that
we take day and night 24/7,
awake and asleep
for our entire life.
And that is breathing.
We start our lives
with an inhale
and we end them with an exhale.
Why do we know so little
about something so essential
to our lives?
We may think that breathwork
is a recent trend,
but its roots are very ancient.
Some of our cultures used
to give massive importance
to mastering our breath.
They used it to
improve their health
and even to achieve
altered states.
The practice of
breathwork dates back
to the origins of
yoga as a practice.
That is more than
2,500 years ago.
It was, and it is
still called Pranayama.
In the ancient Indian
language of Sanskrit,
prana means life energy,
and yama means control.
Our breath allows us to
control our life energy.
That in itself is a whole
universe to explore.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Because when you
breathe in a rhythm,
you actually create
this state of coherence,
especially when you put
an intention behind it,
a positive intention.
And this creates a
harmony in a harmony,
and amplifies the
electromagnetic field
of your heart.
I made a pact that I have to
put as much science evidence
to support these
ideas, but also make
it fun, accessible,
enjoyable for all,
because I really believe that
with these techniques and tools
I teach, the world can become
a much better place for all.
So what is the
history of breathwork?
Where does it all come from?
This is something that the yogis
understood thousands of years
ago.
Now modern science is
now catching this up.
The slow rhythmic breathing
around six breaths per minute
or between 6 and 10
breaths per minute
can do magic for
fully oxygenating
every cell in your body,
but also harmonizing
your nervous system, restoring
balance, and allowing
you to think more clearly.
And it was all about slowing
the breathing down and even
stopping and holding the
breath in various ways.
So it's very different to what
these modern types of breathwork
is about.
So what I learned was
actually Pranayama.
And Pranayama, I would say, is
the source of all breathwork.
And all the breathwork
styles that we exist today.
>> Just like with yoga and
other ancient disciplines,
there is a Renaissance
of breathwork happening
at the moment.
There is an adoption of
ancient Eastern wisdom
into modern Western society
that I find so interesting.
Here is where
diving into stories
from those ancient cultures
can put us even more
in touch with their wisdom.
It becomes more
understood because we
can feel it through stories.
I have also found that conscious
breathing is very powerful
when we are processing
intense emotions.
Our breath is an alchemizer.
It enables life,
and it's right there
to help us transmute
emotions too.
So I give you an example.
There is an ancient
Hindu scripture
called the Bhagavad Gita.
The first time I
heard it years ago,
I understood the
back of a guitar.
But there is no a guitar
because Bhagavad Gita
means the song of God.
And so in the Bhagavad
Gita, we follow a dialogue
between Prince Arjuna
and his guide, Krishna,
who shares with Arjuna
a detailed set of wisdom
through the life situations
that Arjuna faces.
It all starts with a
war, where Arjuna has
to face various moral dilemmas.
We can all relate
to Arjuna as people
who want to align with
high moral choices.
And yet we also have to
face the challenges of life.
Krishna helps Arjuna
apply concretely
the wisdom of ancient India,
and he talks about the breath
as well.
He explains how
our breath can be
leveraged to achieve altered
states of consciousness,
and how it can be used
as a symbol of sacrifice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the Rigveda, which is
actually the most ancient Vedic
text, there is a mention
of a substance called Soma.
Around 50,000 times,
it's referenced.
And Soma was this substance
that the gods at the time
were completely addicted to
and dependent on because it
gave them immortality.
Not only that, it gave them
a connection to the divine,
and it was really like a
panacea for everything.
So they were obsessed with
it and addicted to it.
However, the Soma
starts to run out,
and this is when all the
gods at that time who
were living in this
golden age of our planet,
where there was far less humans
on the planet, all living
in harmony with nature, start
to actually get very, very
concerned because they're so
dependent on this substance,
but now there's less of it.
Well, what they did
was they went inwards
to discover how to create
the Soma from within.
And actually this became
the origin of spirituality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we start looking at the
benefits of conscious breath,
so many threads open up.
For instance, what
is the benefit
of improving the
oxygenation of the blood?
It helps with physical
endurance and overall health.
The main way in which I get
into intense breathing patterns
is through physical exercise.
And this is a good
moment to shout out
to the power of working out.
At the end of the
day, working out
isn't just about
moving our body.
It's also about altering
our breathing patterns
to bring more oxygenation
all across the body.
And besides that, our lungs are
also the biggest waste removal
engine in our entire body.
>> But the reason I
chose pharmacy versus--
because it's supposed to
be a helping profession,
I didn't feel like I was
helping people at all.
And in fact, I saw people
come in and miserable
and becoming even more
miserable, not happier.
And I instantly felt
completely miserable
the moment I stepped
into this role.
And it was this real
feeling of something
was wrong with this system,
because I was seeing people
going away with shopping bags
full of drugs every single day,
they weren't getting better.
So I came up with a little
system, a shopping list system,
which would give people an
informed choice when they went
to the supermarket so
they could buy recipes
for food and little remedies
they could make if they had
a cough or cold or
some kind of thing
that they would usually
buy from a pharmacy
like over-the-counter.
Actually, within a few
weeks of doing this,
I got incredible results.
I actually had doctors calling
me up going, what are you doing?
At first I was like terrified.
I was like, I was
going to be in trouble.
But actually they
were urging me on
to keep going
because I was getting
such good results, getting
people off the medications.
However, this got me
fired from my first job.
I was considered to be
mismanaging the pharmacy.
However, one of the largest
supermarket chains in the UK
headhunted me and
actually urged me on
to take a job with
them because they said,
you're a renegade pharmacist.
We need more people like you.
And lo and behold,
I actually got
promoted to the head office of
one of the biggest supermarket
chains in the world.
So I was actually a bit of
a renegade in this system
because I'm telling people
not to drink fizzy drinks
and eat processed
foods and to actually
try more healthier options.
And obviously, this doesn't
resonate with the system.
So in the end, they shelved my
idea, this healthy shopping list
idea.
I really lost my faith in
something higher than myself.
I got struck almost
like a lightning bolt
with a chronic disease called
ulcerative colitis, which
is a really, really
debilitating condition to have.
I was pretty much housebound
for a year wearing a nappy,
and I was pretty
much surrendering
to this condition with no hope.
And I went to the--
I remember going to the
gastroenteritis specialist who
told me, just shut up
and take the pills.
And I was so depressed
that on the final visit
to the gastroenterologist,
they gave me two options.
Either have your colon
removed, wear a nappy
for the rest of your life
and a colostomy bag, or two,
become a Guinea pig for a drug
that hasn't been tested before.
And I was like, well,
this is all I've got left.
And they say, God stands
for Gift of Desperation.
In this most desperate moment in
my life where I was completely
broken, I prayed.
I prayed really hard.
And by sheer faith, someone
came to me with some answers
and she offered me a third path.
He said, look, I can teach you
some stuff from this system.
Can't guarantee it will
work, but at least maybe you
can give this a go
and you never know.
You may be an amazing
role model for others
if this helps you heal.
And I gave it a go because
I had no other option.
And actually, I got so much
relief from the simple breathing
practices that she
taught me from Pranayama
that I was blown away.
I uncovered so many
incredible insights.
How much hidden knowledge
there is around just simple
breathing techniques
that we can do that
makes such a powerful change.
And I found that there was
already so much science
out there.
So I started to
collate this science
and started to actually
practice these techniques
at a very deep level.
And this is how I came
up with Soma breath.
We produce large amounts
of it during the spirits,
so that makes you
feel really good.
So now you have a technique
where you create this medicine--
oh, come on.
But don't worry if you don't
get the technique right now.
I'll be guiding you
all the way through it.
>> When it comes to innovation
in the breathwork space,
I think it comes down to
bringing good breath techniques
to as many people as possible.
It is a little bit like yoga.
You just have to find
your own way to practice
and to do it on
an ongoing basis.
Niraj does this by training
thousands of practitioners
to deliver their breath
techniques around the world.
>> Soma breath has grown into a
huge movement around the world
for over 2,000 instructors, all
delivering and very well trained
in how to deliver this
pharmacy of different breathing
techniques.
Pranayama is like a pharmacy
of different techniques.
And I wanted to,
as a pharmacist,
really showcase all of these.
And what I'd also
created was an experience
which combines a lot
of Pranayama techniques
together in a sequence that has
extraordinary health benefits
to your cardiovascular system.
So this is when I
created Soma breath
and we go really deep into
more using the power of words
and imagery to help shape and
reprogram the unconscious mind,
because this is a source of all
of our actions and decisions.
And your quality of life
depends on your ability
to have understanding of how the
mind works and to reprogram it.
So Soma breath became, not just
a functional breathing school,
but also a breath
therapy school,
where we have a lot of
breath therapy techniques
which are working
very powerfully.
I really wanted to
look at breath work
as a pharmacy of
different techniques.
So there are techniques for
emotional release, trauma
release, and letting go
of old tension and stress
that's been really holding
you back from pushing forward.
But also there are
techniques that
are designed for improving
functions of your body.
Your nervous system, your
cardiovascular system,
switching off stress,
slowing down aging,
increasing your lifespan.
And actually, the foundation
of Tantric yoga and Pranayama
is actually slow,
rhythmic breathing.
>> I have also found that
conscious breathing is very
powerful when we are
processing intense emotions.
Our breath is an alchemizer.
It enables life.
And it's right there to help
us transmute emotions too.
We talk about the cycles
of life in our episode
about personal development.
From a scientific
perspective and in line
with modern research, we
can look at our breath
through the nervous system.
Studies are showing how certain
breathing techniques stimulate
the parasympathetic
nervous system, which
correlates to our rest
and digest response.
That is to help us relax.
We have all been
in those situations
where we just have
to take a big breath.
Breath of relief.
That is also what we try
to do with our system
after an intense situation.
We take a big breath and we
get ourselves to relax again.
Most people can
hold their breath
for a maximum of
one or two minutes.
In 2021, Budimir
Sobat from Croatia
held his breath underwater
for almost 25 minutes.
That is the power of
controlled breathing.
I find that our breath
is the simplest example
of how we move in cycles.
And on this note,
our breath can also
make us feel balanced
in very easy ways.
I like the alternate
nostril breathing technique.
You inhale through
the right nostril,
then you pause and then you
exhale from the left nostril.
That is half the cycle.
You complete it by breathing
through the left nostril,
posing and breathing out
through the right nostril.
These can help balance the
two hemispheres of our brain.
>> You see, I've
just become a dad.
We have to teach
our kids everything,
right from how to eat,
how to poop, how to pee.
But there's one thing we
don't have to teach them,
and that's how to
breathe, or do we?
You see, I really want to
be teaching my daughter
the importance of
conscious breath control,
because with conscious
breath control,
she can take back
control over things
that we believe we
have no control over.
I really want to teach the kids
this stuff because I believe
that with the tools and
techniques that we teach in Soma
breath, if you think
about this, you
can go without food for
weeks, water for days,
but breathing just
a few minutes.
So really it should be the
first thing we talk about.
And for some reason, even some
of the top longevity experts
in the world have ignored
the importance of the breath,
maybe because it's
too simple, too easy.
It's something we
take for granted.
But actually it's
really important
because I really
believe that we can
solve three of the
big mysteries of life
when we take control
of the breath.
Death, disease, and
even pursuit of bliss,
happiness, and the
meaning of life
to make a really big
impact in people's lives.
Because the breath should be
the first thing we master.
But with the breath and a
breath-based system way of life,
you can actually create
bliss on command.
You can feel happy and
blissful just from your breath,
and it's completely
free and never runs out.
And it means you're going to be
less dependent and less in need
of stuff to fill that void.
So overconsumption, this
very endless consumer system
that we're in, is really
affecting the environment,
our planet, and the health
of our planet and people.
So I really believe we can
solve some really big issues
by making people more aware
the magic of the breath.
>> When it comes to our breath,
there is a whole universe
to explore within.
It comes down to our
preferences and how
we can integrate
conscious breathing
into our day-to-day lives.
Richard Rad from
the Gene Keys talks
about stopping to take
three conscious breaths.
It is a great starting point.
And in some moments, it can
make all the difference.
>> So going back to that
time where I had two choices,
I had to make that bold choice.
I had to let go of my
disbelief and trust
in these spiritual
practices, which
didn't have that much
science at that point
and had to put the
faith into them.
And I'm so glad I did because
making that bold choice has led
to this incredible
life that I now
am so grateful to have
in this day and age
because we have so much
opportunity, so much
abundance of technology
and just so many
incredible things we can
do if we focus and learn
the right strategies and go deep
and go fully in to maximizing
the potential of this incredible
world we actually live in today.
So I really believe that through
breathing together and learning
to breathe better,
we can actually
make the world a better place.
[MUSIC PLAYING]